---
title: How Zombies Inform our Understanding of Racism
layout: article
author: group2
image:
    feature:
    teaser:
    thumb:
storymap:
    id: f6f8cf8ab31e9c13b2c05935dda85c7d
    title: ling-9-shuang-and-tiauna
---

Since the appropriation of the Haitian “zonbi” into American pop culture, zombie narratives have reflected worries and tensions in American society. Focusing our analysis on zombie stories in the mid-20th century, we find that shifts in the construction of these stories from _White Zombie_ to _The Walking Dead_ reflect the development of critical race theory and the ideology surrounding autonomy. Comparing zombie narratives from the 1930s to the 1950s and modern ones from the 2000’s to now, explicit power relationships between zombies and masters have turned into implicit systems of hordes and contagion, which mirrors how our public understanding of racism in the U.S. has transformed from recognizing the explicit, interpersonal manifestations to acknowledging structural racism.

In the 1930s to 1950s, zombie media largely depicted zombies as creatures controlled by evil masters, zombification as a manageable, avoidable danger, and victory against zombification as the expected outcome. All of these characteristics mirrored attitudes at the time of what racism looked like and how to overcome racism. _White Zombie_, known as the first American zombie film, was released in 1932, and tells the story of “evil voodoo master” Murder Legendre who controls an entire workforce of zombies at his mill. After he is knocked unconscious, without him, the zombies have no direction, and end up walking off a cliff. When he is finally killed, the female lead, whom he put into a zombie state, “wakes up” to her normal self. Both of these scenes exemplify that autonomy in zombies could be measured by naming exactly who controlled them. [^1]  They had no autonomy because of clearly defined actors, who were their masters. Furthermore, the state of being a zombie is just that - a state that is induced and reversible. In order to turn the female lead into a zombie, she is tricked into drinking a potion. But when Legendre dies, she is able to turn back into a normal living human. Being a zombie is not a permanent nor unavoidable sentence. In fact, defeating zombie-ness is relatively easily achieved by killing the master.

This story sounds similar to thoughts concerning racism in the 1930s. Paralleling the development of the zombie narrative in American popular culture is explicit racism in the southern United States. Jim Crow laws directly reflected the fear and desire to control that the White population had for Blacks, Africans, and African Americans. Power dynamics were clear: there were masters, those with power, and the disenfranchised, or those without power. Similar to the control over zombification. Blacks at the time were denied rights of being full citizens and full humans, through white people’s harassment, refusal of service at polls and businesses, death threats, and murder.

By the same token, autonomy over one’s body was also affected by the explicit racism of the early to mid 20th century. Henrietta Lacks, the body from which the famously immortal HeLa cells were extracted, was a Black woman living in Maryland during the 1940s. Having developed cervical cancer, she sought help from the local hospital at which Black individuals were often subject to illegal or intentionally-confusing experimentation by white doctors. Henrietta Lacks was no exception. Her cancer cells, removed for study, were found to be immortal, living and multiplying indefinitely unlike any other cells studied previously. This scientific discovery would allow for scientists to conduct numerous studies on human cells without ever troubling a human body. While this development was undeniably important, the dismissal of Black-body autonomy was clear when, without her or her family’s knowledge, Henrietta’s cells were taken and sold in mass quantities to labs all over the world. This went uncontested for years until the family was made aware of the use of Henrietta Lacks’s cells.[^2] The doctors and scientists who worked with Henrietta practiced explicit racism by participating in the racist practices of the hospital and also by taking away Henrietta’s bodily autonomy. Because racism was still so explicit and widely accepted, public understanding of racism was that it was an explicit and interpersonal interaction. The clear limitation of autonomy makes the link between zombie media and Jim Crow-America so apparent.

Moreover, like zombification, the divide between whites and blacks, and how to overcome the divide, were clear. It was easy to be a white person and not have to worry about being adversely affected by or contributing to racism. By being the more powerful members of society, they had the privilege of not having to engage directly in interpersonal racism while continuing to benefit from the racial hierarchy. However, the institutions under which society operated were very explicit in nature. The examples of intentional racism were visibly prevalent in all aspects of life during this particular era. At the same time, whites could be involved in anti-racism work and could believe that by getting rid of Jim Crow laws and other explicit forms of racism, racism would be eradicated. Since racism was so visibly and behaviorally defined, public understanding was that it was a contained, though large, set of flare-ups that could be put out. Going into the civil rights movement in the mid 1950’s, this attitude motivated the fight for an end to segregation and discrimination. These anxieties and motivations of white America were reflected through zombie stories of the time, like _White Zombie_, by pointing out a clearly and validly vilified “master,” by presenting the phenomenon of zombie-ness as contained, and by believing in and striving for an end to zombification.

In contrast, “Current Era Zombie” stories from the 2000’s and on like those found in the TV series _The Walking Dead_ (2010) and _Pride and Prejudice and Zombies_ (2016) present a larger system which unavoidably and permanently controls zombies and the living together. Most notably, usually a kind of overarching contagion affects the masses. Sometimes, the origin of the contagion is unclear in both circumstance and time, representing a kind of constancy not able to be pinpointed. These newer films have evolved into apocalyptic situations where human characters must adopt a survival-focused lifestyle. This too is a reflection of the growing study and understanding of race, racism, and racial ideology in United States society. In the 1970s, Critical Legal Studies led to the development of Critical Race Theory, which began to understand racism as an institutional power imbalance. Our understanding in academia, and more and more, the public sphere, is that racism is not all the racists and their actions added together, but power structures built into society over centuries of white supremacy, white colonialism, and white privilege. The developments in the history of race in the United States vividly reflect this. Protests began to target the court system, the government, and the education system at large for the normalized and standardized, racist ways black people were being treated. Discussions regarding corruption in the more prominent institutions of the United States have begun to dominate the understanding of culture. Screenplay writers, directors, and producers of the Current Era Zombie narratives have reflected this in their storytelling.

To illustrate, the popular television series, _The Walking Dead_, was released in 2010 on the American Movie Classics (AME) network.[^3] In this series, the Current Era Zombies naturally have a contagion that affects the human population. Individuals become zombies by being bitten or by simply dying. Once dead, the unavoidable zombification begins.[^4]  Everyone must die, hence, everyone must become a zombie, hence at the end of it all, only zombies will be left. This differs immensely from the zombies found in earlier movies such as _White Zombie_, who were explicitly controlled by others. Current Era Zombies are often not directly controlled by a certain person or group. Total triumph over zombification is impossible; we can only work towards triumph without ever actually achieving this ideal. Similarly, in the film, _Pride and Prejudice and Zombies_, the origin of zombification is explained vaguely as a disease that came from “the colonies” and most zombies (with the exception of Wickham’s army at St. Lazarus church), come from random, unorganized, outbreaks. Though the tide of the zombies is temporarily stemmed by closing off the last bridge, it is only a matter of time before the zombies make it to the last un-zombified patch of England. In fact, the movie ends with the appearance of Wickham and his zombie horde encroaching on Bennet and Darcy’s wedding. These are primary examples of how zombie narratives reflect the institutionalization of numerous social norms in United States society. There are no masters puppeteering the zombies or controlling the spread of the contagion. Autonomy is for sure limited, but it is hard to say by exactly what. Rather, all living and un-living creatures’ fates are intertwined under this larger power. To analogize, we now understand racism as a system which we are all subjected to in different degrees and ways. In some sense, by being born into this system, many aspects of our lives have been predetermined. Though there is amazing work being done to fight against racism, it is not as simple as stopping the “evil masters” and their explicit discrimination. The coded, ingrained system is much harder to take down. There is a general understanding that we will never fully overcome racism, we just need to keep working towards that ideal.

Zombie narratives have been argued to be reflections of various anxieties white America had and has for black people, immigrants, autonomous women, and others, seeing as how zombies themselves are “empty vessels” which can take on any of these roles and anxieties.[^5]  We argue that cross-examination of zombie stories from the 1930s to the 1950s and the 2000s to now shows that zombie stories tell us a great deal about how we understood racism then and now. The power play between zombies and humans is eerily similar to that between minorities and whites in the US. The structural racism understanding we have now is perhaps a little daunting, but if we have learned anything from these zombie stories, it is that little victories are meaningful.

[^1]:  “_White Zombie_.” IMDb. Accessed April 26, 2016\. [http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023694/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0023694/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1). 
[^2]:  Skloot, Rebecca. _The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks_. New York: Crown Publishers, 2010\. 
[^3]: “_The Walking Dead_.” IMDb. Accessed April 26, 2016\. [http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1520211/](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1520211/). 
[^4]: Ibid. 
[^5]:  Kordas, Ann, “New South, New Immigrants, New Women, New Zombies: The Historical Development of the Zombie in American Popular Culture,” in _Race, Oppression and the Zombie: Essays on Cross-Cultural Appropriations of the Caribbean Tradition_ (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, 2011), pg. #30.